In this lecture, you'll learn how to configure the OSPF router ID,
passive interfaces, and how to do default route
injection with a lab demo.
So in our lab topology, we've got the usual 5 routers, R1 to R5, and R4 is connected out
to the Internet on interface FastEthernet3/0, with IP Address 203.0.113.1.
So let's go onto R4, and check what the router ID is right now.
So I'll do a 'show ip protocols',
and I can see that the router ID is 203.0.113.1.
If I do a 'show ip interface brief', I see that I don't have any loopback interfaces configured on here.
So it's taken the highest IP address, which is
203.0.113.1.
So, it's bad practice to have that.
It's better to use a loopback or to manually set the router ID. So let's configure
a loopback first, so I'll go 'config t', then 'interface loopback 0',
and I'll give it an IP address 1.1.1.1,
255.255.255.255 as the subnet mask. It's a loopback, so I don't need to do a 'no shutdown'. It's 'no shutdown'
automatically.
If I do a 'show ip protocols', you're going to see that the router ID has not changed.
What happens is when the router boots up or when OSPF starts, it checks to see what is the highest loopback
or physical IP address
if the router ID is not being manually set.
But if you change this later by adding a loopback, it's not going to automatically update it.
So, we can force was to update by restarting OSPF. Let's do a 'show run | section ospf' just so I
can be able to copy and paste this back in, and I'm going to copy my current OSPF configuration. And then at global
config,
I'll do a 'no router ospf 1' and then paste the config back in. So, that will stop and start
OSPF on here.
Again, obviously, don't do this in a production environment because you would lose routes. I'll then 'end',
and if I do a 'show ip protocols' now, I'll see the router ID
has updated to the loopback
Other way that you can manipulate the router ID is by setting it manually.
So to do that, in global configuration,
I go 'router ospf 1' and then, 'router-id' and let's give it 2.2.2.2.
And with OSPF,
I'm going to have to restart OSPF again, so I can reload or I can do a 'clear ip ospf process' command.
That's similar to removing and then re-enabling the config. So you saw with EIGRP, when I set the router ID,
it took effect immediately, but with OSPF, if I now do a 'show ip protocols', it's still using the
loopback address. So I can restart OSPF, I'll just copy and paste this in. So I'll 'clear ip ospf process'.
At the enable prompt, it will ask me to verify because again, this would be disruptive, and I'll say yes.
And now, if I do a 'show ip protocols', I'll see that it has taken that new router ID. You can see
it was disruptive, because you see the adjacency went down and then came back up again.
Okay, so that's how you configure the router ID. The next thing,
if we have a look back at the topology diagram, you see on interface FastEthernet3/0,
we've got the 203.0.113.0/24 network, and that is not currently being advertised in OSPF.
I want to advertise that to my routers on the inside,
so routers R1, R2, R3, and R5, but I don't want to give out internal routing
information to the Internet Service Provider (ISP) router.
So, I'm going to make interface FastEthernet3/0 a passive interface.
So let's go back onto R4 again, and if I do a 'show run | section ospf', you'll see that I've just
got a network command right now for the 10.0.0.0 networks, so that is not being advertised in OSPF yet.
And if I go on to another router, and do a 'show ip route', you'll see there's no route there for the
203.0.113.0/24 network.
So. I want R1 and my other internal routers to learn this. So on R4,
I'll go to global configuration, 'router ospf 1', and I will say,
let me just do a 'do show ip interface brief' just to double check what the interface was.
Okay, it was on interface FastEthernet3/0. So still in the OSPF config,
I'll say 'passive-interface FastEthernet 3/0',
and then I need to put in the network command, so that it will be advertised
internally. So, it's 'network 203.0.113.0' the wildcard mask of 0.0.0.255,
and area 0. And if I now go back into another router and do a 'show ip route', if it's converged
yet, yes, there it is.
I can see that that is now being learned by my other internal routers, but it's not going to send any information
out. Okay,
last thing is I want to do static default route
injection into OSPF. So it's back on R4 again, it's connected out to that Service Provider.
So on R4, I will do an 'ip route',
so a static route, for everything that doesn't have a more specific route, so 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0,
and the next hop address is 203.0.113.2.
And I don't want to have to configure a static route on all my other routers. I want them to learn
it dynamically, so under 'router ospf 1',
I'll say 'default-information originate', and that will inject that default static route into OSPF.
So then I go onto R1, and do a 'show ip route' here,
you see the routing table was updated.
It's got that default route, which was learned from OSPF.
Okay, so that was our OSPF advanced topics in the lab.
See you in the next lecture.